## 8.1 Chapter Introduction and Scope

In a multitasking system there is potential for error if one task starts
to access a resource, but does not complete its access before being
transitioned out of the Running state. If the task leaves the resource
in an inconsistent state, then access to the same resource by any other
task or interrupt could result in data corruption, or other similar
issue.

Following are some examples:

* Accessing Peripherals

  Consider the following scenario where two tasks attempt to write to an
  Liquid Crystal Display (LCD).

  1. Task A executes and starts to write the string "Hello world" to the
     LCD.

  2. Task A is pre-empted by Task B after outputting just the beginning
     of the string—"Hello w".

  3. Task B writes "Abort, Retry, Fail?" to the LCD before entering the
     Blocked state.

  4. Task A continues from the point at which it was pre-empted, and
     completes outputting the remaining characters of its string—"orld".

  The LCD now displays the corrupted string "Hello wAbort, Retry, Fail?orld".

* Read, Modify, Write Operations

  Listing 8.1 shows a line of C code, and an example of how the C code
  would typically be translated into assembly code. It can be seen that
  the value of PORTA is first read from memory into a register, modified
  within the register, and then written back to memory. This is called a
  read, modify, write operation.


   <a name="list8.1" title="Listing 8.1 An example read, modify, write sequence"></a>

   ```c
   /* The C code being compiled. */
   PORTA |= 0x01;

   /* The assembly code produced when the C code is compiled. */
   LOAD  R1,[#PORTA] ; Read a value from PORTA into R1
   MOVE  R2,#0x01    ; Move the absolute constant 1 into R2
   OR    R1,R2       ; Bitwise OR R1 (PORTA) with R2 (constant 1)
   STORE R1,[#PORTA] ; Store the new value back to PORTA
   ```
   ***Listing 8.1*** *An example read, modify, write sequence*
 
   This is a 'non-atomic' operation because it takes more than one
   instruction to complete, and can be interrupted. Consider the following
   scenario where two tasks attempt to update a memory mapped register
   called PORTA.

   1. Task A loads the value of PORTA into a register—the read portion of
      the operation.

   2. Task A is pre-empted by Task B before it completes the modify and
      write portions of the same operation.

   3. Task B updates the value of PORTA, then enters the Blocked state.

   4. Task A continues from the point at which it was pre-empted. It
      modifies the copy of the PORTA value that it already holds in a
      register, before writing the updated value back to PORTA.

   In this scenario, Task A updates and writes back an out of date value
   for PORTA. Task B modifies PORTA after Task A takes a copy of the PORTA
   value, and before Task A writes its modified value back to the PORTA
   register. When Task A writes to PORTA, it overwrites the modification
   that has already been performed by Task B, effectively corrupting the
   PORTA register value.

   This example uses a peripheral register, but the same principle applies
   when performing read, modify, write operations on variables.

- Non-atomic Access to Variables

  Updating multiple members of a structure, or updating a variable that is
  larger than the natural word size of the architecture (for example,
  updating a 32-bit variable on a 16-bit machine), are examples of
  non-atomic operations. If they are interrupted, they can result in data
  loss or corruption.

- Function Reentrancy

  A function is 'reentrant' if it is safe to call the function from more
  than one task, or from both tasks and interrupts. Reentrant functions
  are said to be 'thread safe' because they can be accessed from more than
  one thread of execution without the risk of data or logical operations
  becoming corrupted.

  Each task maintains its own stack and its own set of processor
  (hardware) register values. If a function does not access any data other
  than data stored on the stack or held in a register, then the function
  is reentrant, and thread safe. Listing 8.2 is an example of a reentrant
  function. Listing 8.3 is an example of a function that is not reentrant.
  
  If an application uses the newlib C Library, it must set `configUSE_NEWLIB_REENTRANT` to 1
  in FreeRTOSConfig.h to ensure that the Thread Local Storage required by newlib is
  allocated correctly.

  If an application uses the picolibc C Library, it must set `configUSE_PICOLIBC_TLS` to 1 in
  FreeRTOSConfig.h to ensure that the Thread Local Storage required by picolibc is
  allocated correctly.

  If an application uses any other C library and it requires Thread Local Storage (TLS), it
  must set `configUSE_C_RUNTIME_TLS_SUPPORT` to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h and must implement
  the following macros-
  - `configTLS_BLOCK_TYPE` - Type of the per task TLS block.
  - `configINIT_TLS_BLOCK` - Initialize per task TLS block.
  - `configSET_TLS_BLOCK` - Update current TLS block. Called during context switch to ensure
    that the correct TLS block is used.
  - `configDEINIT_TLS_BLOCK` - Free the TLS block.


  <a name="list8.2" title="Listing 8.2 An example of a reentrant function"></a>

  ```c
  /* A parameter is passed into the function. This will either be passed on the 
     stack, or in a processor register. Either way is safe as each task or 
     interrupt that calls the function maintains its own stack and its own set 
     of register values, so each task or interrupt that calls the function will 
     have its own copy of lVar1. */
  long lAddOneHundred( long lVar1 )
  {
      /* This function scope variable will also be allocated to the stack or a 
         register, depending on the compiler and optimization level. Each task
         or interrupt that calls this function will have its own copy of lVar2. */
      long lVar2;

      lVar2 = lVar1 + 100;
      return lVar2;
  }
  ```
  ***Listing 8.2*** *An example of a reentrant function*


  <a name="list8.3" title="Listing 8.3 An example of a function that is not reentrant"></a>

  ```c
  /* In this case lVar1 is a global variable, so every task that calls
     lNonsenseFunction will access the same single copy of the variable. */
  long lVar1;

  long lNonsenseFunction( void )
  {
      /* lState is static, so is not allocated on the stack. Each task that
         calls this function will access the same single copy of the variable. */
      static long lState = 0;
      long lReturn;

      switch( lState )
      {
          case 0 : lReturn = lVar1 + 10;
                   lState = 1;
                   break;

          case 1 : lReturn = lVar1 + 20;
                   lState = 0;
                   break;
      }
  }
  ```
  ***Listing 8.3*** *An example of a function that is not reentrant*


### 8.1.1 Mutual Exclusion

To ensure data consistency is maintained at all times, access to a
resource that is shared between tasks, or is shared between tasks and interrupts,
must be managed using a 'mutual exclusion' technique. The goal is to
ensure that, once a task starts to access a shared resource that is not
re-entrant and not thread-safe, the same task has exclusive access to
the resource until the resource has been returned to a consistent state.

FreeRTOS provides several features that can be used to implement mutual
exclusion, but the best mutual exclusion method is to (whenever
possible, as it is often not practical) design the application in such a
way that resources are not shared, and each resource is accessed only
from a single task.


### 8.1.2 Scope

This chapter covers:

- When and why resource management and control is necessary.
- What a critical section is.
- What mutual exclusion means.
- What it means to suspend the scheduler.
- How to use a mutex.
- How to create and use a gatekeeper task.
- What priority inversion is, and how priority inheritance can reduce
  (but not remove) its impact.