## 4.11 Thread Local Storage and Reentrancy

Thread Local Storage allows an application developer to store arbitrary data in
the Task Control Block of each task. This feature is most commonly used to store
data which would normally be stored in a global variable by non-reentrant functions.

A reentrant function is a function which can safely run from multiple threads
without any side effects. When non-reentrant functions are used in a
multi-threaded environment without thread local storage, special care must be
taken to check the out of band results of these function calls from within a
critical section. Excessive use of critical sections degrades RTOS performance,
so Thread Local Storage is often preferred over the use of critical sections.

By far the most common use of Thread Local Storage is the ```errno``` global used
in the ISO C standard used by the C standard library and POSIX systems.
The ```errno``` global is used to provide an extended result or error code for
common standard library functions such as strtof and strtol.

### 4.11.1 C Runtime Thread Local Storage Implementations

Most embedded libc implementations provide APIs to ensure that non-reentrant
functions can work correctly in a multi-threaded environment. FreeRTOS includes
support for the reentrancy APIs of two commonly used open-source libraries:
[newlib](https://sourceware.org/newlib/) and
[picolibc](https://github.com/picolibc/picolibc).
These pre-built C Runtime Thread Local Storage implementations can be enabled by
by defining the respective macro listed below in their project's FreeRTOSConfig.h
file.

- ```configUSE_NEWLIB_REENTRANT``` for [newlib](https://sourceware.org/newlib/)
- ```configUSE_PICOLIBC_TLS``` for [picolibc](https://github.com/picolibc/picolibc)

### 4.11.2 Custom C Runtime Thread Local Storage

Application developers may implement thread local storage by defining the following
macros in their FreeRTOSConfig.h file:

- Define ```configUSE_C_RUNTIME_TLS_SUPPORT``` to 1 to enable C Runtime Thread
Local Storage support.

- Define ```configTLS_BLOCK_TYPE``` to the c type which should be used for storing
C Runtime Thread Local Storage data.

- Define ```configINIT_TLS_BLOCK``` to the c code which should be run when initializing
the C Runtime Thread Local Storage block.

- Define ```configSET_TLS_BLOCK``` to the c code which should be run when switching
in a new task

- Define ```configDEINIT_TLS_BLOCK``` to the c code which should be run when de-initializing
the C Runtime Thread Local Storage block.

### 4.11.3 Application Thread Local Storage

In addition to C Runtime Thread Local Storage, application developers may also
define a set of application specific pointers to be included in the task control
block. This feature is enabled by setting ```configNUM_THREAD_LOCAL_STORAGE_POINTERS```
to a non-zero number in the project's FreeRTOSConfig.h file.
The ```vTaskSetThreadLocalStoragePointer``` and ```pvTaskGetThreadLocalStoragePointer```
functions defined in Listing 4.30 may be used respectively to set and get the
value of each thread local storage pointer at runtime.


<a name="list4.30" title="Listing 4.30 Function prototypes of the Thread Local Storage Pointer API functions"></a>

```c
void * pvTaskGetThreadLocalStoragePointer( TaskHandle_t xTaskToQuery,
                                           BaseType_t xIndex )

void vTaskSetThreadLocalStoragePointer( TaskHandle_t xTaskToSet,
                                        BaseType_t xIndex,
                                        void * pvValue );
```

***Listing 4.30*** *Function prototypes of the Thread Local Storage Pointer API functions*