## 4.5 Task Priorities

The FreeRTOS scheduler always ensures the highest priority task that can
run is the task selected to enter the *Running* state. Tasks of equal
priority are transitioned into and out of the *Running* state in turn.

The `uxPriority` parameter of the API function used to create the task
gives the task its initial priority. The `vTaskPrioritySet()` API function
changes a task's priority after its creation.

The application-defined `configMAX_PRIORITIES` compile-time configuration
constant sets the number of available priorities. Low numeric priority
values denote low-priority tasks, with priority 0 being the lowest
priority possible—so valid priorities range from 0 to
`(configMAX_PRIORITIES – 1)`. Any number of tasks can share the same
priority.

The FreeRTOS scheduler has two implementations of the algorithm used to
select the *Running* state task and the maximum allowable value for
`configMAX_PRIORITIES` depends on the implementation used:

### 4.5.1 Generic Scheduler

The generic scheduler is written in C and can be used with all FreeRTOS
architecture ports. It does not impose an upper limit on `configMAX_PRIORITEIS`.
In general, it is advisable to minimize `configMAX_PRIORITIES` because more
values require more RAM and will result in a longer worst-case execution time.

### 4.5.2 Architecture-Optimized Scheduler

Architecture optimized implementations are written in architecture-specific
assembly code and are more performant than the generic c implementation, and the
worst-case execution time is the same for all `configMAX_PRIORITIES` values.

The architecture optimized implementation imposes a maximum value for
`configMAX_PRIORITIES` of 32 on 32-bit architectures and 64 on 64-bit
architectures. As with the generic method, it is advisable to keep
`configMAX_PRIORITIES` at the lowest value practical because higher
values require more RAM.

Set `configUSE_PORT_optimized_TASK_SELECTION` to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h to
use the architecture optimized implementation, or 0 to use the generic
implementation. Not all FreeRTOS ports have an architecture optimized
implementation. Those that do default
`configUSE_PORT_optimized_TASK_SELECTION` to 1 if it is left undefined.
Those that do not, default `configUSE_PORT_optimized_TASK_SELECTION` to 0
if it is left undefined.