## 4.8 The Idle Task and the Idle Task Hook

The tasks created in Example 4.4 spend most of their time in the Blocked
state. While in this state, they are not able to run, so they cannot be
selected by the scheduler.

There must always be at least one task that can enter the Running
state[^6]. To ensure this is the case, the scheduler automatically
creates an Idle task when `vTaskStartScheduler()` is called. The idle task
does very little more than sit in a loop, so, like the tasks in the first
examples, it is always able to run.

[^6]: This is the case even when the special low power features of
FreeRTOS are being used, in which case the microcontroller on which
FreeRTOS is executing will be placed into a low power mode if none
of the tasks created by the application are able to execute.

The idle task has the lowest possible priority (priority zero), to
ensure it never prevents a higher priority application task from
entering the *Running* state. However, there is nothing to prevent
application designers from creating tasks at, and therefore that share, the idle
task priority, if desired. The `configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD` compile time
configuration constant in `FreeRTOSConfig.h` can be used to prevent the
Idle task from consuming processing time that would be more productively
allocated to applications tasks that also have a priority of 0. Section
4.12, Scheduling Algorithms, describes `configIDLE_SHOULD_YIELD`.

Running at the lowest priority ensures the Idle task is transitioned out
of the *Running* state as soon as a higher priority task enters the Ready
state. This can be seen at time **tn** in Figure 4.9, where the Idle task is
immediately swapped out to allow Task 2 to execute at the instant Task 2
leaves the *Blocked* state. Task 2 is said to have preempted the idle
task. Preemption occurs automatically, and without the knowledge of the
task being preempted.

> *Note: If a task uses the `vTaskDelete()` API function to delete itself
> then it is essential that the Idle task is not starved of processing time.
> This is because the Idle task is responsible for cleaning up kernel
> resources used by tasks that deleted themselves.*

### 4.8.1 Idle Task Hook Functions

It is possible to add application specific functionality directly into
the idle task through the use of an idle hook (or idle callback)
function, which is a function that is called automatically by the idle task once
per iteration of the idle task loop.

Common uses for the Idle task hook include:

- Executing low priority, background, or continuous processing
  functionality without the RAM overhead of creating application tasks
  for the purpose.

- Measuring the amount of spare processing capacity. (The idle task
  will run only when all higher priority application tasks have no
  work to perform; so measuring the amount of processing time
  allocated to the idle task provides a clear indication of spare
  processing time.)

- Placing the processor into a low power mode, providing an easy and
  automatic method of saving power whenever there is no application
  processing to be performed (although the achievable power saving is
  less than that achieved by tick-less idle mode).

### 4.8.2 Limitations on the Implementation of Idle Task Hook Functions

Idle task hook functions must adhere to the following rules.

- An Idle task hook function must never attempt to block or suspend itself.

  *Note: Blocking the idle task in any way could cause a scenario where
  no tasks are available to enter the *Running* state.*

- If an application task uses the `vTaskDelete()` API function
  to delete itself, then the Idle task hook must always return to its
  caller within a reasonable time period. This is because the Idle
  task is responsible for cleaning up kernel resources allocated to
  tasks that delete themselves. If the idle task remains permanently
  in the Idle hook function, then this clean-up cannot occur.

Idle task hook functions must have the name and prototype shown in Listing 4.18.


<a name="list4.18" title="Listing 4.18 The idle task hook function name and prototype"></a>

```c
void vApplicationIdleHook( void );
```

***Listing 4.18*** *The idle task hook function name and prototype*

<a name="example4.7" title="Example 4.7 Defining an idle task hook function"></a>
---
***Example 4.7*** *Defining an idle task hook function</i></h3>

---

The use of blocking `vTaskDelay()` API calls in Example 4.4 created a lot of
idle time, that is, time when the Idle task executes because both application
tasks are in the *Blocked* state. Example 4.7 makes use of this idle time
through the addition of an Idle hook function, the source for which is
shown in Listing 4.19.


<a name="list4.19" title="Listing 4.19 A very simple Idle hook function"></a>

```c
/* Declare a variable that will be incremented by the hook function.  */
volatile unsigned long ulIdleCycleCount = 0UL;

/*
 * Idle hook functions MUST be called vApplicationIdleHook(), take no
 * parameters, and return void.
 */
void vApplicationIdleHook( void )
{
    /* This hook function does nothing but increment a counter. */
    ulIdleCycleCount++;
}
```

***Listing 4.19*** *A very simple Idle hook function*


`configUSE_IDLE_HOOK` must be set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h for the idle hook function
to get called.

The function that implements the created tasks is modified slightly to
print out the `ulIdleCycleCount` value, as shown in Listing 4.20.


<a name="list4.20" title="Listing 4.20 The source code for the example task now prints out the ulIdleCycleCount value"></a>


```c
void vTaskFunction( void * pvParameters )
{
    char * pcTaskName;
    const TickType_t xDelay250ms = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 250 );

    /*
     * The string to print out is passed in via the parameter. Cast this to
     * a character pointer.
     */
    pcTaskName = ( char * ) pvParameters;

    /* As per most tasks, this task is implemented in an infinite loop. */
    for( ;; )
    {
        /*
         * Print out the name of this task AND the number of times
         * ulIdleCycleCount has been incremented.
         */
        vPrintLineAndNumber( pcTaskName, ulIdleCycleCount );

        /* Delay for a period of 250 milliseconds. */
        vTaskDelay( xDelay250ms );
    }
}
```

***Listing 4.20*** *The source code for the example task now prints out the
ulIdleCycleCount value*

Figure 4.13 shows the output produced by Example 4.7. It can be seen that
the idle task hook function executes approximately 4 million times
between each iteration of the application tasks (the number of
iterations depends on the hardware speed).


<a name="fig4.13" title="Figure 4.13 The output produced when Example 4.7 is executed"></a>

***

```console
C:\Temp>rtosdemo
Task 2 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 0
Task 1 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 0
Task 2 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 3869504
Task 1 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 3869504
Task 2 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 8564623
Task 1 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 8564623
Task 2 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 13181489
Task 1 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 13181489
Task 2 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 17838406
Task 1 is running
ulIdleCycleCount = 17838406
Task 2 is running
```

***Figure 4.13*** *The output produced when Example 4.7 is executed*
***