## 9.1 Chapter Introduction and Scope

It has already been noted that real-time embedded systems have to take
actions in response to events. Previous chapters have described features
of FreeRTOS that allow events to be communicated to tasks. Examples of
such features include semaphores and queues, both of which have the
following properties:

- They allow a task to wait in the Blocked state for a single event to
  occur.

- They unblock a single task when the event occurs. The task that is
  unblocked is the highest priority task that was waiting for the
  event.

Event groups are another feature of FreeRTOS that allow events to be
communicated to tasks. Unlike queues and semaphores:

- Event groups allow a task to wait in the Blocked state for a
  combination of one of more events to occur.

- Event groups unblock all the tasks that were waiting for the same
  event, or combination of events, when the event occurs.

These unique properties of event groups make them useful for
synchronizing multiple tasks, broadcasting events to more than one task,
allowing a task to wait in the Blocked state for any one of a set of
events to occur, and allowing a task to wait in the Blocked state for
multiple actions to complete.

Event groups also provide the opportunity to reduce the RAM used by an
application as, often, it is possible to replace many binary semaphores
with a single event group.

Event group functionality is optional. To include event group
functionality, build the FreeRTOS source file event\_groups.c as part of
your project.


### 9.1.1 Scope

This chapter aims to give readers a good understanding of:

- Practical uses for event groups.
- The advantages and disadvantages of event groups relative to other
  FreeRTOS features.
- How to set bits in an event group.
- How to wait in the Blocked state for bits to become set in an event
  group.
- How to use an event group to synchronize a set of tasks.