## 7.1 Introduction

### 7.1.1 Events

Embedded real-time systems have to take actions in response to events
that originate from the environment. For example, a packet arriving on
an Ethernet peripheral (the event) might require passing it to a TCP/IP
stack for processing (the action). Non-trivial systems will have to
service events that originate from multiple sources, all of which will
have different processing overhead and response time requirements. In
each case, a judgment has to be made as to the best event processing
implementation strategy:

- How should the event be detected? Interrupts are normally used, but
  inputs can also be polled.

- When interrupts are used, how much processing should be performed
  inside the interrupt service routine (ISR), and how much outside? It
  is normally desirable to keep each ISR as short as possible.

- How are events communicated to the main (non-ISR) code, and how can
  this code be structured to best accommodate processing of
  potentially asynchronous occurrences?

FreeRTOS does not impose any specific event processing strategy on the
application designer, but does provide features that allow the chosen
strategy to be implemented in a simple and maintainable way.

It is important to draw a distinction between the priority of a task,
and the priority of an interrupt:

- A task is a software feature that is unrelated to the hardware on
  which FreeRTOS is running. The priority of a task is assigned in
  software by the application writer, and a software algorithm (the
  scheduler) decides which task will be placed in the Running state.

- Although written in software, an interrupt service routine is a
  hardware feature because the hardware controls which interrupt
  service routine will run, and when it will run. Tasks will only run
  when there are no ISRs running, so the lowest priority interrupt
  will interrupt the highest priority task, and there is no way for a
  task to pre-empt an ISR.

All architectures on which FreeRTOS will run are capable of processing
interrupts, but details relating to interrupt entry, and interrupt
priority assignment, vary between architectures.


### 7.1.2 Scope

This chapter covers:

- Which FreeRTOS API functions can be used from within an interrupt
  service routine.
- Methods of deferring interrupt processing to a task.
- How to create and use binary semaphores and counting semaphores.
- The differences between binary and counting semaphores.
- How to use a queue to pass data into and out of an interrupt service
  routine.
- The interrupt nesting model available with some FreeRTOS ports.