## 7.2 Using the FreeRTOS API from an ISR

### 7.2.1 The Interrupt Safe API

Often it is necessary to use the functionality provided by a FreeRTOS
API function from an interrupt service routine (ISR), but many FreeRTOS
API functions perform actions that are not valid inside an ISR. The most
notable of these is placing the task that called the API function into
the Blocked state— if an API function is called from an ISR, then it is
not being called from a task, so there is no calling task that can be
placed into the Blocked state. FreeRTOS solves this problem by providing
two versions of some API functions; one version for use from tasks, and
one version for use from ISRs. Functions intended for use from ISRs have
"FromISR" appended to their name.

> *Note: Never call a FreeRTOS API function that does not have "FromISR"
> in its name from an ISR.*


### 7.2.2 The Benefits of Using a Separate Interrupt Safe API

Having a separate API for use in interrupts allows task code to be more
efficient, ISR code to be more efficient, and interrupt entry to be
simpler. To see why, consider the alternative solution, which would have
been to provide a single version of each API function that could be
called from both a task and an ISR. If the same version of an API
function could be called from both a task and an ISR then:

- The API functions would need additional logic to determine if they
  had been called from a task or an ISR. The additional logic would
  introduce new paths through the function, making the functions
  longer, more complex, and harder to test.

- Some API function parameters would be obsolete when the function was
  called from a task, while others would be obsolete when the function
  was called from an ISR.

- Each FreeRTOS port would need to provide a mechanism for determining
  the execution context (task or ISR).

- Architectures on which it is not easy to determine the execution
  context (task or ISR) would require additional, wasteful, more
  complex to use, and non-standard interrupt entry code that allowed
  the execution context to be provided by software.


### 7.2.3 The Disadvantages of Using a Separate, Interrupt Safe API

Having two versions of some API functions allows both tasks and ISRs to
be more efficient, but introduces a new problem; sometimes it is
necessary to call a function that is not part of the FreeRTOS API, but
makes use of the FreeRTOS API, from both a task and an ISR.

This is normally only a problem when integrating third party code, as
that is the only time when the software's design is out of the control
of the application writer. If this does become an issue, then the problem
can be overcome using one of the following techniques:

-  Defer interrupt processing to a task[^12], so the API function is
   only ever called from the context of a task.

- If you are using a FreeRTOS port that supports interrupt nesting,
  then use the version of the API function that ends in "FromISR", as
  that version can be called from tasks and ISRs. (The reverse is not
  true, API functions that do not end in "FromISR" must not be called
  from an ISR.)

- Third party code normally includes an RTOS abstraction layer that
  can be implemented to test the context from which the function is
  being called (task or interrupt), and then call the API function
  that is appropriate for the context.


[^12]: Deferred interrupt processing is covered in the next section of
this book.


### 7.2.4 The xHigherPriorityTaskWoken Parameter

This section introduces the concept of the `xHigherPriorityTaskWoken`
parameter. Do not be concerned if you do not fully understand this
section yet, as practical examples are provided in following sections.

If a context switch is performed by an interrupt, then the task running
when the interrupt exits might be different than the task that was running
when the interrupt was entered—the interrupt will have interrupted one
task, but returned to a different task.

Some FreeRTOS API functions can move a task from the Blocked state to
the Ready state. This has already been seen with functions such as
`xQueueSendToBack()`, which will unblock a task if there was a task
waiting in the Blocked state for data to become available on the subject
queue.

If the priority of a task that is unblocked by a FreeRTOS API function
is higher than the priority of the task in the Running state, then, in
accordance with the FreeRTOS scheduling policy, a switch to the higher
priority task should occur. When the switch to the higher priority task
actually occurs is dependent on the context from which the API function
is called:

- If the API function was called from a task:

  If `configUSE_PREEMPTION` is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h then the
  switch to the higher priority task occurs automatically within the API
  function, in other words, before the API function has exited. This has already been
  seen in Figure 6.6, where a write to the timer command queue resulted
  in a switch to the RTOS daemon task before the function that wrote to
  the command queue had exited.

- If the API function was called from an interrupt:

  A switch to a higher priority task will not occur automatically inside
  an interrupt. Instead, a variable is set to inform the application
  writer that a context switch should be performed. Interrupt safe API
  functions (those that end in "FromISR") have a pointer parameter
  called `pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken` that is used for this purpose.

  If a context switch should be performed, then the interrupt safe API
  function will set `*pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken` to `pdTRUE`. To be able to
  detect this has happened, the variable pointed to by
  `pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken` must be initialized to `pdFALSE` before it is
  used for the first time.

  If the application writer opts not to request a context switch from
  the ISR, then the higher priority task will remain in the Ready state
  until the next time the scheduler runs, which in the worst case will be
  during the next tick interrupt.

  FreeRTOS API functions can only set `*pxHighPriorityTaskWoken` to
  `pdTRUE`. If an ISR calls more than one FreeRTOS API function, then the
  same variable can be passed as the `pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken` parameter
  in each API function call, and the variable only needs to be
  initialized to `pdFALSE` before it is used for the first time.

There are several reasons why context switches do not occur
automatically inside the interrupt safe version of an API function:

- Avoiding unnecessary context switches

  An interrupt may execute more than once before it is necessary for a
  task to perform any processing. For example, consider a scenario
  where a task processes a string that was received by an interrupt
  driven UART; it would be wasteful for the UART ISR to switch to the
  task each time a character was received because the task would only
  have processing to perform after the complete string had been
  received.

- Control over the execution sequence

  Interrupts can occur sporadically, and at unpredictable times.
  Expert FreeRTOS users may want to temporarily avoid an unpredictable
  switch to a different task at specific points in their
  application, although this can also be achieved using the FreeRTOS
  scheduler locking mechanism.

- Portability

  It is the simplest mechanism that can be used across all FreeRTOS ports.

- Efficiency

  Ports that target smaller processor architectures only allow a
  context switch to be requested at the very end of an ISR, and
  removing that restriction would require additional and more complex
  code. It also allows more than one call to a FreeRTOS API function
  within the same ISR without generating more than one request for a
  context switch within the same ISR.

- Execution in the RTOS tick interrupt

  As will be seen later in this book, it is possible to add
  application code into the RTOS tick interrupt. The result of
  attempting a context switch inside the tick interrupt is dependent
  on the FreeRTOS port in use. At best, it will result in an
  unnecessary call to the scheduler.

Use of the `pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken` parameter is optional. If it is not
required, then set `pxHigherPriorityTaskWoken` to NULL.


### 7.2.5 The portYIELD\_FROM\_ISR() and portEND\_SWITCHING\_ISR() Macros

This section introduces the macros that are used to request a context
switch from an ISR. Do not be concerned if you do not fully understand
this section yet, as practical examples are provided in following
sections.

`taskYIELD()` is a macro that can be called in a task to request a context
switch. `portYIELD_FROM_ISR()` and `portEND_SWITCHING_ISR()` are both
interrupt safe versions of `taskYIELD()`. `portYIELD_FROM_ISR()` and
`portEND_SWITCHING_ISR()` are both used in the same way, and do the same
thing[^13]. Some FreeRTOS ports only provide one of the two macros.
Newer FreeRTOS ports provide both macros. The examples in this book use
`portYIELD_FROM_ISR()`.

[^13]: Historically, `portEND_SWITCHING_ISR()` was the name used in
FreeRTOS ports that required interrupt handlers to use an assembly
code wrapper, and `portYIELD_FROM_ISR()` was the name used in FreeRTOS
ports that allowed the entire interrupt handler to be written in C.


<a name="list7.1" title="Listing 7.1 The portEND\_SWITCHING\_ISR() macros"></a>

```c
portEND_SWITCHING_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken );
```
***Listing 7.1*** *The portEND_SWITCHING\_ISR() macros*


<a name="list7.2" title="Listing 7.2 The portYIELD\_FROM\_ISR() macros"></a>

```c
portYIELD_FROM_ISR( xHigherPriorityTaskWoken );
```
***Listing 7.2*** *The portYIELD\_FROM\_ISR() macros*


The `xHigherPriorityTaskWoken` parameter passed out of an interrupt safe
API function can be used directly as the parameter in a call to
`portYIELD_FROM_ISR()`.

If the `portYIELD_FROM_ISR()` `xHigherPriorityTaskWoken` parameter is
`pdFALSE` (zero), then a context switch is not requested, and the macro
has no effect. If the `portYIELD_FROM_ISR()` `xHigherPriorityTaskWoken`
parameter is not `pdFALSE`, then a context switch is requested, and the
task in the Running state might change. The interrupt will always return
to the task in the Running state, even if the task in the Running state
changed while the interrupt was executing.

Most FreeRTOS ports allow `portYIELD_FROM_ISR()` to be called anywhere
within an ISR. A few FreeRTOS ports (predominantly those for smaller
architectures), only allow `portYIELD_FROM_ISR()` to be called at the very
end of an ISR.