## 7.3 Deferred Interrupt Processing

It is normally considered best practice to keep ISRs as short as
possible. Reasons for this include:

- Even if tasks have been assigned a very high priority, they will
  only run if no interrupts are being serviced by the hardware.

- ISRs can disrupt (add 'jitter' to) both the start time, and the
  execution time, of a task.

- Depending on the architecture on which FreeRTOS is running, it might
  not be possible to accept any new interrupts, or at least a subset
  of new interrupts, while an ISR is executing.

- The application writer needs to consider the consequences of, and
  guard against, resources such as variables, peripherals, and memory
  buffers being accessed by a task and an ISR at the same time.

- Some FreeRTOS ports allow interrupts to nest, but interrupt nesting
  can increase complexity and reduce predictability. The shorter an
  interrupt is, the less likely it is to nest.

An interrupt service routine must record the cause of the interrupt, and
clear the interrupt. Any other processing necessitated by the interrupt
can often be performed in a task, allowing the interrupt service routine
to exit as quickly as is practical. This is called 'deferred interrupt
processing', because the processing necessitated by the interrupt is
'deferred' from the ISR to a task.

Deferring interrupt processing to a task also allows the application
writer to prioritize the processing relative to other tasks in the
application, and use all the FreeRTOS API functions.

If the priority of the task to which interrupt processing is deferred is
above the priority of any other task, then the processing will be
performed immediately, just as if the processing had been performed in
the ISR itself. This scenario is shown in Figure 7.1, in which Task 1 is
a normal application task, and Task 2 is the task to which interrupt
processing is deferred.


<a name="fig7.1" title="Figure 7.1 Completing interrupt processing in a high priority task"></a>

<div align="center">
<img src="../media/image48.png" alt="Figure 7.1 *Completing interrupt processing in a high priority task*"/>

***Figure 7.1*** **Completing interrupt processing in a high priority task**
</div>

In Figure 7.1, interrupt processing starts at time t2, and effectively
ends at time t4, but only the period between times t2 and t3 is spent in
the ISR. If deferred interrupt processing had not been used then the
entire period between times t2 and t4 would have been spent in the ISR.

There is no absolute rule as to when it is best to perform all
processing necessitated by an interrupt in the ISR, and when it is best
to defer part of the processing to a task. Deferring processing to a
task is most useful when:

- The processing necessitated by the interrupt is not trivial. For
  example, if the interrupt is just storing the result of an analog to
  digital conversion, then it is almost certain this is best performed
  inside the ISR, but if result of the conversion must also be passed
  through a software filter, then it may be best to execute the filter
  in a task.

- It is convenient for the interrupt processing to perform an action
  that cannot be performed inside an ISR, such as write to a console,
  or allocate memory.

- The interrupt processing is not deterministicâ€”meaning it is not
  known in advance how long the processing will take.

The following sections describe and demonstrate the concepts introduced
in this chapter so far, including FreeRTOS features that can be used to
implement deferred interrupt processing.