## 13.3 Stack Overflow

Stack overflow is the second most common source of support requests.
FreeRTOS provides several features to assist trapping and debugging
stack related issues[^28].

[^28]: These features are not available in the FreeRTOS Windows port.


### 13.3.1 The uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark() API Function

Each task maintains its own stack, the total size of which is specified
when the task is created. `uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark()` is used to query
how close a task has come to overflowing the stack space allocated to
it. This value is called the stack 'high water mark'.


<a name="list13.1" title="Listing 13.1 The uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark() API function prototype"></a>

```c
UBaseType_t uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark( TaskHandle_t xTask );
```
***Listing 13.1*** *The uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark() API function prototype*

**uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark() parameters and return value**

- `xTask`

  The handle of the task whose stack high water mark is being
  queried (the subject task)—see the pxCreatedTask parameter of the
  `xTaskCreate()` API function for information on obtaining handles to
  tasks.

  A task can query its own stack high water mark by passing NULL in
  place of a valid task handle.

- Return value

  The amount of stack used by the task grows and shrinks as the task
  executes and interrupts are processed. `uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark()`
  returns the minimum amount of remaining stack space that has been
  available since the task started executing. This is the amount of stack
  that remains unused when stack usage is at its greatest (or deepest)
  value. The closer the high water mark is to zero, the closer the task
  has come to overflowing its stack.

`uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark2()` API can be used instead of
`uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark()` which only differs in the return type.


<a name="list13.2" title="Listing 13.2 The uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark2() API function prototype"></a>

```c
configSTACK_DEPTH_TYPE uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark2( TaskHandle_t xTask );
```
***Listing 13.2*** *The uxTaskGetStackHighWaterMark2() API function prototype*

Using `configSTACK_DEPTH_TYPE` allows the application writer to control the type
used for stack depth.

### 13.3.2 Run Time Stack Checking—Overview

FreeRTOS includes three optional run time stack checking mechanisms. These
are controlled by the `configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW` compile time
configuration constant within FreeRTOSConfig.h. Both methods increase
the time it takes to perform a context switch.

The stack overflow hook (or stack overflow callback) is a function that
is called by the kernel when it detects a stack overflow. To use a stack
overflow hook function:

1. Set `configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW` to either 1 , 2 or 3 in
   FreeRTOSConfig.h, as described in the following sub-sections.

1. Provide the implementation of the hook function, using the exact
   function name and prototype shown in Listing 13.3.


<a name="list13.3" title="Listing 13.3 The stack overflow hook function prototype"></a>

```c
void vApplicationStackOverflowHook( TaskHandle_t *pxTask, signed char *pcTaskName );
```
***Listing 13.3*** *The stack overflow hook function prototype*

The stack overflow hook is provided to make trapping and debugging stack
errors easier, but there is no real way to recover from a stack overflow
when it occurs. The function's parameters pass the handle and name of
the task that has overflowed its stack into the hook function.

The stack overflow hook gets called from the context of an interrupt.

Some microcontrollers generate a fault exception when they detect an
incorrect memory access, and it is possible for a fault to be triggered
before the kernel has a chance to call the stack overflow hook function.


### 13.3.3 Run Time Stack Checking—Method 1

Method 1 is selected when `configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW` is set to 1.

A task's entire execution context is saved onto its stack each time it
gets swapped out. It is likely that this will be the time at which stack
usage reaches its peak. When `configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW` is set to 1,
the kernel checks that the stack pointer remains within the valid stack
space after the context has been saved. The stack overflow hook is
called if the stack pointer is found to be outside its valid range.

Method 1 is quick to execute, but can miss stack overflows that occur
between context switches.


### 13.3.4 Run Time Stack Checking—Method 2

Method 2 performs additional checks to those already described for
method 1. It is selected when `configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW` is set to 2.

When a task is created, its stack is filled with a known pattern. Method
2 tests the last valid 20 bytes of the task stack space to verify that
this pattern has not been overwritten. The stack overflow hook function
is called if any of the 20 bytes have changed from their expected
values.

Method 2 is not as quick to execute as method 1, but is still relatively
fast, as only 20 bytes are tested. Most likely, it will catch all stack
overflows; however, it is possible (but highly improbable) that some
overflows will be missed.

### 13.3.4 Run Time Stack Checking—Method 3

Method 3 is selected when `configCHECK_FOR_STACK_OVERFLOW` is set to 3.

This method is available only for selected ports. When available, this method
enables ISR stack checking. When an ISR stack overflow is detected, an
assert is triggered. Note that the stack overflow hook function is not called in
this case because it is specific to a task stack and not the ISR stack.