## 13.4 Use of printf() and sprintf()

Logging via `printf()` is a common source of error, and,
unaware of this, it is common for application developers to then add
further calls to `printf()` to aid debugging, and in-so-doing, exacerbate
the problem.

Many cross compiler vendors will provide a `printf()` implementation that
is suitable for use in small embedded systems. Even when that is the
case, the implementation may not be thread safe, probably won't be
suitable for use inside an interrupt service routine, and depending on
where the output is directed, take a relatively long time to execute.

Particular care must be taken if a `printf()` implementation that is
specifically designed for small embedded systems is not available, and a
generic `printf()` implementation is used instead, as:

- Just including a call to `printf()` or `sprintf()` can massively
  increase the size of the application's executable.

- `printf()` and `sprintf()` may call `malloc()`, which might be invalid if
  a memory allocation scheme other than heap\_3 is in use. See section
  3.2, Example Memory Allocation Schemes, for more information.

- `printf()` and `sprintf()` may require a stack that is many times bigger
  than would otherwise be required.


### 13.4.1 Printf-stdarg.c

Many of the FreeRTOS demonstration projects use a file called
printf-stdarg.c, which provides a minimal and stack-efficient
implementation of `sprintf()` that can be used in place of the standard
library version. In most cases, this will permit a much smaller stack to
be allocated to each task that calls `sprintf()` and related functions.

printf-stdarg.c also provides a mechanism for directing the `printf()`
output to a port character by character which, while slow, allows stack
usage to be decreased even further.

Note that not all copies of `printf-stdarg.c` included in the FreeRTOS
download implement `snprintf()`. Copies that do not implement `snprintf()`
simply ignore the buffer size parameter, as they map directly to
`sprintf()`.

printf-stdarg.c is open source, but is owned by a third party, and
therefore licensed separately from FreeRTOS. The license terms are
contained at the top of the source file.