## 13.5 Other Common Sources of Error

### 13.5.1 Symptom: Adding a simple task to a demo causes the demo to crash

Creating a task requires memory to be obtained from the heap. Many of
the demo application projects dimension the heap to be exactly big
enough to create the demo tasks—so, after the tasks are created, there
will be insufficient heap remaining for any further tasks, queues, event
groups, or semaphores to be added.

The idle task, and possibly also the RTOS daemon task, are created
automatically when `vTaskStartScheduler()` is called.
`vTaskStartScheduler()` will return only if there is not enough heap
memory remaining for these tasks to be created. Including a null loop `[ for(;;); ]`
after the call to `vTaskStartScheduler()` can make this error easier to debug.

To be able to add more tasks, you must either increase the heap size, or remove
some of the existing demo tasks. The increase in heap size will always be
limited by the amount of RAM available. See section 3.2, Example Memory
Allocation Schemes, for more information.


### 13.5.2 Symptom: Using an API function within an interrupt causes the application to crash

Do not use API functions within interrupt service routines, unless the
name of the API function ends with '...FromISR()'. In particular, do not
create a critical section within an interrupt unless using the interrupt
safe macros. See section 7.2, Using the FreeRTOS API from an ISR, for
more information.

In FreeRTOS ports that support interrupt nesting, do not use any API
functions in an interrupt that has been assigned an interrupt priority
above `configMAX_SYSCALL_INTERRUPT_PRIORITY`. See section 7.8, Interrupt
Nesting, for more information.


### 13.5.3 Symptom: Sometimes the application crashes within an interrupt service routine

The first thing to check is that the interrupt is not causing a stack
overflow. Some ports only check for stack overflow within tasks, and not
within interrupts.

The way interrupts are defined and used differs between ports and
between compilers. Therefore, the second thing to check is that the
syntax, macros, and calling conventions used in the interrupt service
routine are exactly as described on the documentation page provided for
the port being used, and exactly as demonstrated in the demo application
provided with the port.

If the application is running on a processor that uses numerically low
priority numbers to represent logically high priorities, then ensure the
priority assigned to each interrupt takes that into account, as it can
seem counter-intuitive. If the application is running on a processor
that defaults the priority of each interrupt to the maximum possible
priority, then ensure the priority of each interrupt is not left at its
default value. See section 7.8, Interrupt Nesting, and section 13.2,
Interrupt Priorities, for more information.


### 13.5.4 Symptom: The scheduler crashes when attempting to start the first task

Ensure the FreeRTOS interrupt handlers have been installed. Refer to the
documentation page for the FreeRTOS port in use for information, and the
demo application provided for the port for an example.

Some processors must be in a privileged mode before the scheduler can be
started. The easiest way to achieve this is to place the processor into
a privileged mode within the C startup code, before main() is called.


### 13.5.5 Symptom: Interrupts are unexpectedly left disabled, or critical sections do not nest correctly

If a FreeRTOS API function is called before the scheduler has been
started then interrupts will deliberately be left disabled, and not
re-enabled again until the first task starts to execute. This is done to
protect the system from crashes caused by interrupts that attempt to use
FreeRTOS API functions during system initialization, before the
scheduler has been started, and while the scheduler may be in an
inconsistent state.

Do not alter the microcontroller interrupt enable bits or priority flags
using any method other than calls to `taskENTER_CRITICAL()` and
`taskEXIT_CRITICAL()`. These macros keep a count of their call nesting
depth to ensure interrupts become enabled again only when the call
nesting has unwound completely to zero. Be aware that some library
functions may themselves enable and disable interrupts.


### 13.5.6 Symptom: The application crashes even before the scheduler is started

An interrupt service routine that could potentially cause a context
switch must not be permitted to execute before the scheduler has been
started. The same applies to any interrupt service routine that attempts
to send to or receive from a FreeRTOS object, such as a queue or
semaphore. A context switch cannot occur until after the scheduler has
started.

Many API functions cannot be called until after the scheduler has been
started. It is best to restrict API usage to the creation of objects
such as tasks, queues, and semaphores, rather than the use of these
objects, until after `vTaskStartScheduler()` has been called.


### 13.5.7 Symptom: Calling API functions while the scheduler is suspended, or from inside a critical section, causes the application to crash

The scheduler is suspended by calling `vTaskSuspendAll()` and resumed
(unsuspended) by calling `xTaskResumeAll()`. A critical section is entered
by calling `taskENTER_CRITICAL()`, and exited by calling
`taskEXIT_CRITICAL()`.

Do not call API functions while the scheduler is suspended, or from
inside a critical section.

 ## 13.6 Additional Debugging Steps

If you encounter an issue not covered in the common causes described above,
you can try to use some of the following debugging steps.

- Define `configASSERT()`, enable malloc failed checking and stack overflow
  checking in the application's FreeRTOSConfig file.
- Check the return values of the FreeRTOS APIs to make sure those were
  successful.
- Check that the secheduler related configuration, like `configUSE_TIME_SLICING`, and
  `configUSE_PREEMPTION` are set correctly as per the application requirements.
- [This page](https://www.freertos.org/Debugging-Hard-Faults-On-Cortex-M-Microcontrollers.html)
  provides details about debugging hard faults on Cortex-M microcontrollers.