## 3.1 Introduction

### 3.1.1 Prerequisites

Being a competent C programmer is a prerequisite for using FreeRTOS, so
this chapter assumes the reader is familiar with concepts such as:

- The different compiling and linking phases of building a C project.
- What the stack and heap are.
- The standard C library `malloc()` and `free()` functions.

### 3.1.2 Scope

This chapter covers:

- When FreeRTOS allocates RAM.
- The five example memory allocation schemes supplied with FreeRTOS.
- Which memory allocation scheme to select.

### 3.1.3 Switching Between Static and Dynamic Memory Allocation

The following chapters introduce kernel objects such as tasks, queues,
semaphores, and event groups. The RAM required to hold these objects can
be allocated statically at compile-time or dynamically at run time.
Dynamic allocation reduces design and planning effort, simplifies the
API, and minimizes the RAM footprint. Static allocation is more
deterministic, removes the need to handle memory allocation failures,
and removes the risk of heap fragmentation (where the heap has enough
free memory but not in one usable contiguous block).

The FreeRTOS API functions that create kernel objects using statically
allocated memory are only available when `configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION`
is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h. The FreeRTOS API functions that create
kernel objects using dynamically allocated memory are only available
when `configSUPPORT_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION` is either set to 1 or left
undefined in FreeRTOSConfig.h. It is valid to have both constants set to
1 simultaneously.

More information concerning `configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION` is in
section 3.4 Using Static Memory Allocation.

### 3.1.4 Using Dynamic Memory Allocation

Dynamic memory allocation is a C programming concept, not a concept
specific to either FreeRTOS or multitasking. It is relevant to FreeRTOS
because kernel objects can optionally be created using dynamically
allocated memory, and the general-purpose C library `malloc()` and `free()`
functions may not be suitable for one or more of the following reasons:

- They are not always available on small embedded systems.
- Their implementation can be relatively large, taking up valuable
  code space.
- They are rarely thread-safe.
- They are not deterministic; the amount of time taken to execute the
  functions will differ from call to call.
- They can suffer from fragmentation (where the heap has enough free
  memory but not in one usable contiguous block).
- They can complicate the linker configuration.
- They can be the source of difficult to debug errors if the heap
  space is allowed to grow into memory used by other variables.

### 3.1.5 Options for Dynamic Memory Allocation

Early versions of FreeRTOS used a memory pools allocation scheme, where
pools of different size memory blocks are pre-allocated at compile-time,
then returned by the memory allocation functions. Although block
allocation is common in real-time systems, it was removed from FreeRTOS
because its inefficient use of RAM in really small embedded systems led to
many support requests.

FreeRTOS now treats memory allocation as part of the portable layer
(instead of part of the core codebase). This is because different
embedded systems have different dynamic memory allocation and timing
requirements, so a single dynamic memory allocation algorithm will only
ever be appropriate for a subset of applications. Also, removing dynamic
memory allocation from the core codebase enables application writers to
provide their own specific implementations when appropriate.

When FreeRTOS requires RAM it calls `pvPortMalloc()` instead of `malloc()`.
Likewise, when FreeRTOS frees previously allocated RAM it calls
`vPortFree()` instead of `free()`. `pvPortMalloc()` has the same prototype as
the standard C library `malloc()` function, and `vPortFree()` has the same
prototype as the standard C library `free()` function.

`pvPortMalloc()` and `vPortFree()` are public functions, so they can also be
called from application code.

FreeRTOS comes with five example implementations of `pvPortMalloc()` and
`vPortFree()`, which are all documented in this chapter. FreeRTOS
applications can use one of the example implementations or provide their
own.

The five examples are defined in the heap\_1.c, heap\_2.c, heap\_3.c,
heap\_4.c and heap\_5.c source files respectively, all of which are
located in the FreeRTOS/Source/portable/MemMang directory.