## 3.4 Using Static Memory Allocation

Section 3.1.4 lists some of the disadvantages that come with dynamic memory allocation. To avoid those issues, static
memory allocation allows the developer to explicitly create every memory block needed by the application. This has the
following advantages:

- All required memory is known at compile time.
- All memory is deterministic.

There are other advantages, but with these advantages come a few complications. The main complication is the addition of a
few additional user functions to manage some kernel memory, and the second complication is the need to ensure all static
memory is declared in a suitable scope.


### 3.4.1 Enabling Static Memory Allocation

Static memory allocation is enabled by setting `configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION` to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.  When this
configuration is enabled, the kernel enables all the `static` versions of the kernel functions. These are:

- `xTaskCreateStatic`
- `xEventGroupCreateStatic`
- `xEventGroupGetStaticBuffer`
- `xQueueGenericCreateStatic`
- `xQueueGenericGetStaticBuffers`
- `xQueueCreateMutexStatic`
  - *if `configUSE_MUTEXES` is 1*
- `xQueueCreateCountingSemaphoreStatic`
  - *if `configUSE_COUNTING_SEMAPHORES` is 1*
- `xStreamBufferGenericCreateStatic`
- `xStreamBufferGetStaticBuffers`
- `xTimerCreateStatic`
  - *if `configUSE_TIMERS` is 1*
- `xTimerGetStaticBuffer`
  - *if `configUSE_TIMERS` is 1*

These functions will be explained in the appropriate chapters in this book.

### 3.4.2 Static Internal Kernel Memory

When the static memory allocator is enabled, the idle task and the timer task (if enabled) will use static memory supplied
by user functions. These user functions are:

- `vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory`
  - *if `configUSE_TIMERS` is 1*
- `vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory`


#### 3.4.2.1 vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory

If `configSUPPORT_STATIC_ALLOCATION` and `configUSE_TIMERS` are both enabled, the kernel will call `vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory()`
to allow the application to create and return a memory buffer for the timer task TCB and the timer task stack. The function will
also return the size of the timer task stack. A suggested implementation of the timer task memory function is shown in listing 3.14.


<a name="list3.14" title="Listing 3.14 Typical implementation of vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory"></a>


```c
void vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory( StaticTask_t **ppxTimerTaskTCBBuffer,
                                     StackType_t **ppxTimerTaskStackBuffer,
                                     uint32_t *pulTimerTaskStackSize )
{
  /* If the buffers to be provided to the Timer task are declared inside this
  function then they must be declared static - otherwise they will be allocated on
  the stack and hence would not exists after this function exits. */
  static StaticTask_t xTimerTaskTCB;
  static StackType_t uxTimerTaskStack[ configMINIMAL_STACK_SIZE ];

  /* Pass out a pointer to the StaticTask_t structure in which the Timer task's
  state will be stored. */
  *ppxTimerTaskTCBBuffer = &xTimerTaskTCB;

  /* Pass out the array that will be used as the Timer task's stack. */
  *ppxTimerTaskStackBuffer = uxTimerTaskStack;

  /* Pass out the stack size of the array pointed to by *ppxTimerTaskStackBuffer.
  Note the stack size is a count of StackType_t */
  *pulTimerTaskStackSize = sizeof(uxTimerTaskStack) / sizeof(*uxTimerTaskStack);
}
```
***Listing 3.14*** *Typical implementation of vApplicationGetTimerTaskMemory*


Since there is only a single timer task in any system including SMP, a valid solution to the timer task memory problem
is to allocate static buffers in the `vApplicationGetTimeTaskMemory()` function and return the buffer pointers to the kernel.


#### 3.4.2.2 vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory

The idle task is run when a core runs out of scheduled work. The idle task performs some housekeeping and can also trigger
the user's `vTaskIdleHook()` if it is enabled.  In a symmetric multiprocessing system (SMP) there are also non-housekeeping
idle tasks for each of the remaining cores, but these are statically allocated internally to `configMINIMAL_STACK_SIZE` bytes.

The `vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory` function is called to allow the application to create the needed buffers for the "main"
idle task. Listing 3.15 shows a typical implementation of the `vApplicationIdleTaskMemory()` function using static local
variables to create the needed buffers.


<a name="list3.15" title="Listing 3.15 Typical implementation of vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory"></a>

```c
void vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory( StaticTask_t **ppxIdleTaskTCBBuffer,
                                    StackType_t **ppxIdleTaskStackBuffer,
                                    uint32_t *pulIdleTaskStackSize )
{
  static StaticTask_t xIdleTaskTCB;
  static StackType_t uxIdleTaskStack[ configMINIMAL_STACK_SIZE ];

  *ppxIdleTaskTCBBuffer = &xIdleTaskTCB;
  *ppxIdleTaskStackBuffer = uxIdleTaskStack;
  *pulIdleTaskStackSize = configMINIMAL_STACK_SIZE;
}
```
***Listing 3.15*** *Typical implementation of vApplicationGetIdleTaskMemory*