## 2.2 Understanding the FreeRTOS Distribution

### 2.2.1 Definition: FreeRTOS Port

FreeRTOS can be built with approximately twenty different compilers and can
run on more than forty different processor architectures. Each supported
combination of compiler and processor is called a FreeRTOS port.


### 2.2.2 Building FreeRTOS

FreeRTOS is a library that provides multi-tasking capabilities to what
would otherwise be a single-threaded, bare-metal application.

FreeRTOS is supplied as a set of C source files. Some source files are
common to all ports, while others are specific to a port. Building the
source files as part of your project makes the FreeRTOS API available to
your application. A demo application that can be used as a reference is
provided for each official FreeRTOS port. The demo application is
pre-configured to build the correct source files and include the correct
header files.

At the time of its creation, each demo application built 'out of the
box' with no compiler errors or warnings. Please use the FreeRTOS
support forums (<https://forums.FreeRTOS.org>) to let us know if
subsequent changes to the build tools mean that this is no longer the case.
Section 2.3 describes the demo applications.


### 2.2.3 FreeRTOSConfig.h

Constants defined in a header file called FreeRTOSConfig.h configure the
kernel. Do not include FreeRTOSConfig.h directly in your source files!
Instead, include FreeRTOS.h, which will include FreeRTOSConfig.h at the
appropriate time.

FreeRTOSConfig.h is used to tailor the FreeRTOS kernel for use in a
specific application. For example, FreeRTOSConfig.h contains constants
such as `configUSE_PREEMPTION` which defines whether
FreeRTOS uses co-operative or pre-emptive scheduling[^1].

[^1]: Section 4.13 describes scheduling algorithms.

FreeRTOSConfig.h tailors FreeRTOS for a specific application, so it
should be located in a directory that is part of the application, not in
a directory that contains the FreeRTOS source code.

The main FreeRTOS distribution contains a demo application for every
FreeRTOS port, and every demo application has its own FreeRTOSConfig.h
file. It is recommended to start with, then adapt, the FreeRTOSConfig.h
used by the demo application provided for the FreeRTOS port you use
rather than create the file from scratch.

The FreeRTOS reference manual and <https://www.freertos.org/a00110.html>
describe the constants that appear in FreeRTOSConfig.h. It is
not necessary to include all the constants in FreeRTOSConfig.h—many get a
default value if omitted.


### 2.2.4 Official Distributions

Individual FreeRTOS libraries, including the kernel, are available from
their own Github repository and as a zip file archive. The ability to
obtain individual libraries is convenient when using FreeRTOS in
production code. However, it is better to download the main FreeRTOS
distribution to get started as that contains both libraries and example
projects.

The main distribution contains source code for all the FreeRTOS
libraries, all the FreeRTOS kernel ports, and project files for all the
FreeRTOS demo applications. Do not be put off by the number of files!
Applications only require a small subset.

Use <https://github.com/FreeRTOS/FreeRTOS/releases/latest> to download a
zip file containing the latest distribution. Alternatively, use one of
the following Git commands to clone the main distribution from GitHub,
including individual libraries sub-moduled from their respective Git
repositories:

* * *
```
git clone https://github.com/FreeRTOS/FreeRTOS.git --recurse-submodules

git clone git@github.com:FreeRTOS/FreeRTOS.git --recurse-submodules
```
* * *


Figure 2.1 shows the first and second-level directories of the FreeRTOS
distribution:

<a name="fig2.1" title="Figure 2.1 Top level directories within the FreeRTOS distribution"></a>

* * *
```
FreeRTOS
│ │
│ ├─Source  Contains the FreeRTOS kernel source files
│ │
│ └─Demo    Contains pre-configured and port specific FreeRTOS kernel demo projects
│
FreeRTOS-Plus
│
├─Source    Contains source code for other FreeRTOS and ecosystem libraries
│
└─Demo      Contains demo projects for other FreeRTOS and ecosystem libraries
```
***Figure 2.1*** *Top level directories within the FreeRTOS distribution*
* * *

The distribution only contains one copy of the FreeRTOS kernel source
files; all the demo projects expect to find the kernel source files in
the FreeRTOS/Source directory, and may not build if the directory
structure is changed.


### 2.2.5 FreeRTOS Source Files Common to All Ports

tasks.c and list.c implement the core FreeRTOS kernel functionality and
are always required. They are located directly in the FreeRTOS/Source
directory, as shown in Figure 2.2. The same directory also contains the
following optional source files:

-  **queue.c**

   queue.c provides both queue and semaphore services, as described later
   in this book. queue.c is nearly always required.

-  **timers.c**

   timers.c provides software timer functionality, as described later in
   this book. It only needs to be built if the application uses software
   timers.

-  **event\_groups.c**

   event\_groups.c provides event group functionality, as described later
   in this book. It only needs to be built if the application uses event
   groups.

-  **stream\_buffer.c**

   stream\_buffer.c provides both stream buffer and message buffer
   functionality, as described later in this book. It only needs to
   be built if the application uses
   stream or message buffers.

-  **croutine.c**

   croutine.c implements the FreeRTOS co-routine functionality. It only
   needs to be built if the application uses co-routines. Co-routines are
   intended for use on very small microcontrollers, are rarely used now.
   They are, therefore, no longer maintained, and their use is not
   recommended for new designs. Co-routines are not described in this
   book.


<a name="fig2.2" title="Figure 2.2 Core FreeRTOS source files within the FreeRTOS directory tree"></a>

* * *
```
FreeRTOS
│
└─Source
    │
    ├─tasks.c         FreeRTOS source file - always required
    ├─list.c          FreeRTOS source file - always required
    ├─queue.c         FreeRTOS source file - nearly always required
    ├─timers.c        FreeRTOS source file - optional
    ├─event_groups.c  FreeRTOS source file – optional
    ├─stream_buffer.c FreeRTOS source file - optional
    └─croutine.c      FreeRTOS source file – optional and no longer maintained
```
***Figure 2.2*** *Core FreeRTOS source files within the FreeRTOS directory tree*
* * *

It is recognized that the file names used in the zip file distribution
may cause namespace clashes, as many projects will already use files
with the same names. Users can change the file names if necessary, but
the names cannot change in the distribution, as doing so will break
compatibility with existing users' projects as well as FreeRTOS-aware
development tools.


### 2.2.6 FreeRTOS Source Files Specific to a Port

The FreeRTOS/Source/portable directory contains source files specific to a FreeRTOS
port. The portable directory is arranged as a hierarchy, first by
compiler, then by processor architecture. Figure 2.3 shows the hierarchy.

To run FreeRTOS on a processor with architecture '*architecture*' using
compiler '*compiler*', in addition to the core FreeRTOS source
files, you must also build the files located in the
FreeRTOS/Source/portable/\[*compiler*\]/\[*architecture*\] directory.

As described in Chapter 3, Heap Memory Management, FreeRTOS also
considers heap memory allocation to be part of the portable layer. If
`configSUPPORT_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION` is set to 0, then do not include a heap
memory allocation scheme in your project.

FreeRTOS provides example heap allocation schemes in the
FreeRTOS/Source/portable/MemMang directory. If FreeRTOS is configured to
use dynamic memory allocation, it is necessary to either include one of
the heap implementation source files from that directory in your project, or
provide your own implementation.

> **! Do not include more than one of the example heap allocation implementations in your project.**


<a name="fig2.3" title="Figure 2.3 Port specific source files within the FreeRTOS directory tree"></a>

* * *
```
FreeRTOS
│
└─Source
    │
    └─portable Directory containing all port specific source files
        │
        ├─MemMang Directory containing the alternative heap allocation source files
        │
        ├─[compiler 1] Directory containing port files specific to compiler 1
        │   │
        │   ├─[architecture 1] Contains files for the compiler 1 architecture 1 port
        │   ├─[architecture 2] Contains files for the compiler 1 architecture 2 port
        │   └─[architecture 3] Contains files for the compiler 1 architecture 3 port
        │
        └─[compiler 2] Directory containing port files specific to compiler 2
            │
            ├─[architecture 1] Contains files for the compiler 2 architecture 1 port
            ├─[architecture 2] Contains files for the compiler 2 architecture 2 port
            └─[etc.]
```
***Figure 2.3*** *Port specific source files within the FreeRTOS directory tree*
* * *

### 2.2.7 Include Paths

FreeRTOS requires the inclusion of three directories in the compiler's
include path. These are:

1. The path to the core FreeRTOS kernel header files, FreeRTOS/Source/include.

2. The path to the source files specific to the FreeRTOS port in use,
   FreeRTOS/Source/portable/\[*compiler*\]/\[*architecture*\].

3. The path to the correct FreeRTOSConfig.h header file.


### 2.2.8 Header Files

A source file that uses the FreeRTOS API must include FreeRTOS.h,
followed by the header file that contains the prototype for the API
function—either task.h, queue.h, semphr.h, timers.h,
event_groups.h, stream_buffer.h, message_buffer.h or croutine.h. Do not
explicitly include any other FreeRTOS header files—FreeRTOS.h automatically includes
FreeRTOSConfig.h.