## 2.3 Demo Applications

Each FreeRTOS port comes with at least one demo application that, at the
time of its creation, built 'out of the box' with no compiler errors or
warnings. Please use the FreeRTOS support forums
(<https://forums.FreeRTOS.org>) to let us know if subsequent changes to
the build tools mean that is no longer the case.

> **Cross Platform Support**: FreeRTOS is developed and tested on Windows,
> Linux and MacOS systems and with a variety of toolchains, both embedded and
> traditional.  However, occasionally build errors can appear due to differences
> of version or a missed test.  Please use the FreeRTOS support forum
> (<https://forums.FreeRTOS.org>) to alert us of any such errors.

Demo applications have several purposes:

- To provide an example of a working and pre-configured project, with
  the correct files included, and the correct compiler options set.
- To allow 'out of the box' experimentation with minimal setup or
  prior knowledge.
- To demonstrate how to use FreeRTOS APIs.
- As a base from which real applications can be created.
- To stress test the kernel's implementation.

Each demo project is located in a unique sub-directory under the
FreeRTOS/Demo directory. The sub-directory's name indicates the port to
which the demo project relates.

The FreeRTOS.org website contains a page for each demo application. The
web page includes information on:

- How to locate the project file for the demo within the FreeRTOS directory
  structure.
- The hardware or emulator the project is configured to use.
- How to set up the hardware to run the demo.
- How to build the demo.
- The demo's expected behaviour.

All demo projects create a subset of the 'common demo tasks', the
implementations of which are in the FreeRTOS/Demo/Common/Minimal
directory. The common demo tasks exist to demonstrate how to use the
FreeRTOS API and test FreeRTOS kernel ports—they do not implement any
particular useful functionality.

Many demo projects can also be configured to create a simple 'blinky'
style starter project that typically creates two RTOS tasks and one
queue.

Every demo project includes a file called main.c that contains the
`main()` function, which creates the demo application tasks before starting
the FreeRTOS kernel. See the
comments within the individual main.c files for information specific to
that demo.

<a name="fig2.4" title="Figure 2.4 The demo directory hierarchy"></a>

* * *
```
FreeRTOS
    │
    └─Demo          Directory containing all the demo projects
        │
        ├─[Demo x]  Contains the project file that builds demo 'x'
        ├─[Demo y]  Contains the project file that builds demo 'y'
        ├─[Demo z]  Contains the project file that builds demo 'z'
        └─Common    Contains files that are built by all the demo applications
```
***Figure 2.4*** *The demo directory hierarchy*
* * *