## 2.4 Creating a FreeRTOS Project

### 2.4.1 Adapting One of the Supplied Demo Projects

Every FreeRTOS port comes with at least one pre-configured demo
application. It is recommended to create new projects by adapting one of
these existing projects to ensure the new project has the correct files
included, the correct interrupt handlers installed, and the correct
compiler options set.

To create a new application from an existing demo project:

1. Open the supplied demo project and ensure it builds and executes as
   expected.

2. Remove the source files that implement the demo tasks, which are
   files located in the Demo/Common directory.

3. Delete all the function calls within `main()`, except
   `prvSetupHardware()` and `vTaskStartScheduler()`, as shown in Listing 2.1.

4. Verify that the project still builds.

When you follow these steps you create a project that includes the correct
FreeRTOS source files, but does not define any functionality.


<a name="list2.1" title="Listing 2.1 The template for a new main() function"></a>


```c
int main( void )
{
    /* Perform any hardware setup necessary. */
    prvSetupHardware();

    /* --- APPLICATION TASKS CAN BE CREATED HERE --- */

    /* Start the created tasks running. */
    vTaskStartScheduler();

    /* Execution will only reach here if there was insufficient heap to
       start the scheduler. */
    for( ;; );
    return 0;
}
```
***Listing 2.1*** *The template for a new main() function*



### 2.4.2 Creating a New Project from Scratch

As already mentioned, it is recommended to create new projects from an
existing demo project. If this is not desirable, then use the following
procedure to create a new project:

1. Using your chosen toolchain, create a new project that does not yet
   include any FreeRTOS source files.

1. Ensure the new project builds, downloads to your target hardware,
   and executes.

1. Only when you are sure you already have a working project, add the
   FreeRTOS source files detailed in Table 1 to the project.

1. Copy the `FreeRTOSConfig.h` header file used by the demo project and
   provided for the port in use into your new project directory.

1. Add the following directories to the path the project will search to
   locate header files:

   - FreeRTOS/Source/include
   - FreeRTOS/Source/portable/\[*compiler*\]/\[*architecture*\] (where
     \[*compiler*\] and \[*architecture*\] are correct for your chosen port)
   - The directory containing the `FreeRTOSConfig.h` header file

1. Copy the compiler settings from the relevant demo project.

1. Install any FreeRTOS interrupt handlers that might be necessary. Use
   the web page that describes the port in use and the demo project
   provided for the port in use as a reference.

<a name="tbl1" title="Table 1 FreeRTOS source files to include in the project"></a>

* * *
| File                            | Location                     |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
| tasks.c                         | FreeRTOS/Source              |
| queue.c                         | FreeRTOS/Source              |
| list.c                          | FreeRTOS/Source              |
| timers.c                        | FreeRTOS/Source              |
| event\_groups.c                 | FreeRTOS/Source              |
| stream\_buffer.c                | FreeRTOS/Source              |
| All C and assembler files       | FreeRTOS/Source/portable/\[compiler\]/\[architecture\] |
| heap\_n.c                       | FreeRTOS/Source/portable/MemMang, where n is either 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 |

***Table 1*** *FreeRTOS source files to include in the project*
* * *

**Note on heap memory:**
 If `configSUPPORT_DYNAMIC_ALLOCATION` is 0 then do not include a heap memory
 allocation scheme in your project. Else include a heap memory allocation scheme
 in your project, either one of the heap\_*n*.c files, or one provided by
 yourself. Refer to Chapter 3, Heap Memory Management, for more information.