## 10.2 Task Notifications; Benefits and Limitations

### 10.2.1 Performance Benefits of Task Notifications

Using a task notification to send an event or data to a task is
significantly faster than using a queue, semaphore or event group to
perform an equivalent operation.

### 10.2.2 RAM Footprint Benefits of Task Notifications

Likewise, using a task notification to send an event or data to a task
requires significantly less RAM than using a queue, semaphore or event
group to perform an equivalent operation. This is because each
communication object (queue, semaphore or event group) must be created
before it can be used, whereas enabling task notification functionality
has a fixed overhead.  The RAM cost for task notifications is
`configTASK_NOTIFICATION_ARRAY_ENTRIES` * 5 bytes per task.  The
default value for `configTASK_NOTIFICATION_ARRAY_ENTRIES` is 1 making
the default size for task notifications is 5 bytes per task.

### 10.2.3 Limitations of Task Notifications

Task notifications are faster and use less RAM than communication
objects, but task notifications cannot be used in all scenarios. This
section documents the scenarios in which a task notification cannot be
used:

- Sending an event or data to an ISR

  Communication objects can be used to send events and data from an ISR
  to a task, and from a task to an ISR.

  Task notifications can be used to send events and data from an ISR to
  a task, but they cannot be used to send events or data from a task to
  an ISR.

- Enabling more than one receiving task

  A communication object can be accessed by any task or ISR that knows
  its handle (which might be a queue handle, semaphore handle, or event
  group handle). Any number of tasks and ISRs can process events or data
  sent to any given communication object.

  Task notifications are sent directly to the receiving task, so they can
  only be processed by the task to which the notification is sent.
  However, this is rarely a limitation in practical cases because, while
  it is common to have multiple tasks and ISRs sending to the same
  communication object, it is rare to have multiple tasks and ISRs
  receiving from the same communication object.

- Buffering multiple data items

  A queue is a communication object that can hold more than one data
  item at a time. Data that has been sent to the queue, but not yet
  received from the queue, is buffered inside the queue object.

  Task notifications send data to a task by updating the receiving
  task's notification value. A task's notification value can only hold
  one value at a time.

- Broadcasting to more than one task

  An event group is a communication object that can be used to send an
  event to more than one task at a time.

  Task notifications are sent directly to the receiving task, so can
  only be processed by the receiving task.

- Waiting in the blocked state for a send to complete

  If a communication object is temporarily in a state that means no more
  data or events can be written to it (for example, when a queue is full
  no more data can be sent to the queue), then tasks attempting to write
  to the object can optionally enter the Blocked state to wait for their
  write operation to complete.

  If a task attempts to send a task notification to a task that already
  has a notification pending, then it is not possible for the sending
  task to wait in the Blocked state for the receiving task to reset its
  notification state. As will be seen, this is rarely a limitation in
  practical cases in which a task notification is used.