## 6.1 Chapter Introduction and Scope

Software timers are used to schedule the execution of a function at a
set time in the future, or periodically with a fixed frequency. The
function executed by the software timer is called the software timer's
callback function.

Software timers are implemented by, and are under the control of, the
FreeRTOS kernel. They do not require hardware support, and are not
related to hardware timers or hardware counters.

Note that, in line with the FreeRTOS philosophy of using innovative
design to ensure maximum efficiency, software timers do not use any
processing time unless a software timer callback function is actually
executing.

Software timer functionality is optional. To include software timer
functionality:

1. Build the FreeRTOS source file FreeRTOS/Source/timers.c as part of
   your project.

2. Define the constants detailed below in the application's FreeRTOSConfig.h header file :

- `configUSE_TIMERS`

  Set `configUSE_TIMERS` to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h.

- `configTIMER_TASK_PRIORITY`

  Sets the priority of the timer service task between 0 and ( `configMAX_PRIORITIES` - 1 ).

- `configTIMER_QUEUE_LENGTH`

  Sets the maximum number of unprocessed commands that the timer command queue can hold at any one time.

- `configTIMER_TASK_STACK_DEPTH`

  Sets the size of the stack (in words, not bytes) allocated to the timer service task.

### 6.1.1 Scope

This chapter covers:

- The characteristics of a software timer compared to the
  characteristics of a task.
- The RTOS daemon task.
- The timer command queue.
- The difference between a one shot software timer and a periodic
  software timer.
- How to create, start, reset and change the period of a software timer.