## 6.7 Changing the Period of a Timer

Every official FreeRTOS port is provided with one or more example
projects. Most example projects are self-checking, and an LED is used to
give visual feedback of the project's status; if the self-checks have
always passed then the LED is toggled slowly, if a self-check has ever
failed then the LED is toggled quickly.

Some example projects perform the self-checks in a task, and use the
`vTaskDelay()` function to control the rate at which the LED toggles.
Other example projects perform the self-checks in a software timer
callback function, and use the timer's period to control the rate at
which the LED toggles.


### 6.7.1 The xTimerChangePeriod() API Function

The period of a software timer is changed using the `xTimerChangePeriod()` function.

If `xTimerChangePeriod()` is used to change the period of a timer that is
already running, then the timer will use the new period value to
recalculate its expiry time. The recalculated expiry time is relative to
when `xTimerChangePeriod()` was called, not relative to when the timer was
originally started.

If `xTimerChangePeriod()` is used to change the period of a timer that is
in the Dormant state (a timer that is not running), then the timer will
calculate an expiry time, and transition to the Running state (the timer
will start running).

> *Note: Never call `xTimerChangePeriod()` from an interrupt service
> routine. The interrupt-safe version `xTimerChangePeriodFromISR()` should
> be used in its place.*


<a name="list6.12" title="Listing 6.12 The xTimerChangePeriod() API function prototype"></a>

```c
BaseType_t xTimerChangePeriod( TimerHandle_t xTimer,
                               TickType_t xNewPeriod,
                               TickType_t xTicksToWait );
```
***Listing 6.12*** *The xTimerChangePeriod() API function prototype*


**xTimerChangePeriod() parameters and return value**

- `xTimer`

  The handle of the software timer being updated with a new period
  value. The handle will have been returned from the call to
  `xTimerCreate()` used to create the software timer.

- `xTimerPeriodInTicks`

  The new period for the software timer, specified in ticks. The
  `pdMS_TO_TICKS()` macro can be used to convert a time specified in
  milliseconds into a time specified in ticks.

- `xTicksToWait`

  `xTimerChangePeriod()` uses the timer command queue to send the
  'change period' command to the daemon task. `xTicksToWait` specifies the
  maximum amount of time the calling task should remain in the Blocked
  state to wait for space to become available on the timer command queue,
  if the queue is already full.

  `xTimerChangePeriod()` will return immediately if `xTicksToWait` is zero
  and the timer command queue is already full.

  The macro `pdMS_TO_TICKS()` can be used to convert a time specified in
  milliseconds into a time specified in ticks.

  If `INCLUDE_vTaskSuspend` is set to 1 in FreeRTOSConfig.h, then setting
  `xTicksToWait` to `portMAX_DELAY` will result in the calling task remaining
  in the Blocked state indefinitely (without a timeout) to wait for space
  to become available in the timer command queue.

  If `xTimerChangePeriod()` is called before the scheduler has been
  started, then the value of `xTicksToWait` is ignored, and
  `xTimerChangePeriod()` behaves as if `xTicksToWait` had been set to zero.

- Returned value

  There are two possible return values:

  - `pdPASS`

    `pdPASS` will be returned only if data was successfully sent to the
    timer command queue.

    If a block time was specified (`xTicksToWait` was not zero), then it is
    possible the calling task was placed into the Blocked state to wait for
    space to become available in the timer command queue before the function
    returned, but data was successfully written to the timer command queue
    before the block time expired.

  - `pdFAIL`

    `pdFAIL` will be returned if the 'change period' command could not be
    written to the timer command queue because the queue was already
    full.

    If a block time was specified (`xTicksToWait` was not zero) then the
    calling task will have been placed into the Blocked state to wait for
    the daemon task to make room in the queue, but the specified block time
    expired before that happened.

Listing 6.13 shows how the FreeRTOS examples that include self-checking
functionality in a software timer callback function use
`xTimerChangePeriod()` to increase the rate at which an LED toggles if a
self-check fails. The software timer that performs the self-checks is
referred to as the 'check timer'.


<a name="list6.13" title="Listing 6.13 Using xTimerChangePeriod()"></a>

```c
/* The check timer is created with a period of 3000 milliseconds, resulting
   in the LED toggling every 3 seconds. If the self-checking functionality
   detects an unexpected state, then the check timer's period is changed to
   just 200 milliseconds, resulting in a much faster toggle rate. */
const TickType_t xHealthyTimerPeriod = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 3000 );
const TickType_t xErrorTimerPeriod = pdMS_TO_TICKS( 200 );

/* The callback function used by the check timer. */
static void prvCheckTimerCallbackFunction( TimerHandle_t xTimer )
{
    static BaseType_t xErrorDetected = pdFALSE;

    if( xErrorDetected == pdFALSE )
    {
        /* No errors have yet been detected. Run the self-checking function
           again. The function asks each task created by the example to report
           its own status, and also checks that all the tasks are actually
           still running (and so able to report their status correctly). */
        if( CheckTasksAreRunningWithoutError() == pdFAIL )
        {
            /* One or more tasks reported an unexpected status. An error might
               have occurred. Reduce the check timer's period to increase the
               rate at which this callback function executes, and in so doing
               also increase the rate at which the LED is toggled. This
               callback function is executing in the context of the RTOS daemon
               task, so a block time of 0 is used to ensure the Daemon task
               never enters the Blocked state. */
            xTimerChangePeriod(
                  xTimer,            /* The timer being updated */
                  xErrorTimerPeriod, /* The new period for the timer */
                  0 );               /* Do not block when sending this command */

            /* Latch that an error has already been detected. */
            xErrorDetected = pdTRUE;
        }
    }

    /* Toggle the LED. The rate at which the LED toggles will depend on how
       often this function is called, which is determined by the period of the
       check timer. The timer's period will have been reduced from 3000ms to
       just 200ms if CheckTasksAreRunningWithoutError() has ever returned
       pdFAIL. */
    ToggleLED();
}
```
***Listing 6.13*** *Using xTimerChangePeriod()*